---
layout: post
title:  "Seb Haines gives a seminar, 13:00-14:00 in LT3"
date:   2022-11-9
categories: seminar
---
Dr Seb Haines (PHY) gives a seminar: Quantum critical phenomena in a compressible displacive ferroelectric

Abstract: I will present an experimental and theoretical study of strontium titanate [1,2] that clarifies the nature
of quantum critical phenomena in ferroelectrics and helps to open up opportunities for the study of
exotic normal and superconducting states in polar materials including ferrolectrics, ferrielectrics,
antiferroelectrics, and multiferroics. The evidence is seen in a series of high-precision studies of the
dielectric function as a function of temperature and pressure that dramatically confirm the
applicability of a theory of the quantum critical state in displacive ferroelectrics and of
superconductivity in polar materials—anticipated more than 50 y ago [3–5]. Furthermore, these data
reveal states in regimes where this model breaks down. I will go on to show some new lowtemperature and high-pressure inelastic neutron diffraction data that I hope will allow us to understand these unexplained states. This is a work in progress.

The study of quantum phase transitions [6,7] and quantum critical systems has led to the discovery of
novel phases of matter [8] and the introduction of novel conceptual frameworks for the description of
emergent phenomena. A quantum phase transition reached by varying a tuning parameter such as
lattice density or electronic band filling fraction is imagined to separate two or more lowtemperature states with qualitatively different types of order. An example is a transition from a magnetically polarized to a paramagnetic state in a metal. In the Kondo lattice model, for instance,
at sufficiently low temperature the paramagnetic state is described as a Fermi liquid in which the
elementary excitations arise from the hybridization of conduction electron states and well-localized
f-electron orbitals. Another example involves a transition from a displacive ferroelectric state to an
unpolarized or quantum paraelectric state in polar materials such as the perovskite oxides. In
contrast to the case of the magnetic metals, the nature of the unpolarized state in incipient
ferroelectrics remains in some respects an enigma, especially in the low temperature regime. In the
simplest model, the quantum paraelectric state is characterized by an activated form of the
temperature dependence of the inverse dielectric susceptibility in which the activation temperature
scale vanishes at a continuous quantum phase transition [i.e., at a quantum critical point (QCP)].
However, this picture has proved to be insufficient and in particular is contradicted by the
observation of an anomalous temperature dependence—including a mysterious minimum—in the
inverse susceptibility of SrTiO3 and related incipient displacive ferroelectrics at low temperatures [9–11],
which theoretical works have attempted to describe.


1. Coak, M. J. et al. Quantum critical phenomena in a compressible displacive ferroelectric. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 117, 12707–12712 (2020).
2. Coak, M. J. et al. Dielectric Response of Quantum Critical Ferroelectric as a Function of
Pressure. Sci. Rep. 8, (2018).
3. LARKIN, A. I. & KHMELNITSKII, D. E. PHASE TRANSITION IN UNIAXIAL FERROELECTRICS. Sov.
Phys. JETP-USSR 29, 1123- (1969).
4. LARKIN, A. I. & PIKIN, S. A. PHASE TRANSITIONS OF FIRST ORDER BUT NEARLY OF SECOND.
Sov. Phys. JETP-USSR 29, 891- (1969).
5. Khmel’nitski\v i, D. E. & Schneerson, V. L. Low-temperature displacement-type phase
transition in crystals. Sov. Phys. - Solid State 13, 832–841 (1971).
6. Hertz, J. A. Quantum critical phenomena. Phys. Rev. B 14, 1165–1184 (1976).
7. Millis, A. J. Effect of a non-zero temperature on quantum critical points in itinerant fermion
systems. Phys. Rev. B 48, 7183–7196 (1993).
8. Neubauer, A. et al. Topological Hall Effect in the A Phase of MnSi. Phys. Rev. Lett. 102, (2009).
9. Rowley, S. E. et al. Ferroelectric quantum criticality. Nat Phys 10, 367–372 (2014).
10. Rowley, S. E. et al. Quantum criticality in a uniaxial organic ferroelectric. J. Phys. Condens.
Matter 27, 395901 (2015).
11. Rowley, S. E. et al. Uniaxial ferroelectric quantum criticality in multiferroic hexaferrites
BaFe_12O_19 and SrFe_12O_19. Sci. Rep. 6, 25724 (2016).


